My degree is in finance and economics, and I can decipher all the expert articles. But I have found it’s easier to predict the future by paying close attention to what is happening to me, my family and my friends.

Back in the early to mid-1990s when I was No. 2 at Sierra Online, I engaged Piper Jaffray multiple times. One of the benefits of a good, personal relationship with an investment bank is they let you buy “friends and family” shares in an IPO. Prior to a company going public, the investment bank sells most of the stock to mutual funds, pension funds, family offices, etc., but they hold back a small amount for friends.

1998 and 1999 were crazy years for going public. About 450 companies went public in 1999. It was common for a stock to jump 30-50 percent on its first day of trading, and wasn’t unheard of for a stock to double on its first day of trading.

The day before a company was to go public, Piper would call and ask if I would like to buy friends and family shares. The deal was always the same: 1,000 shares at the IPO price set by the investment bank and I had about an hour to make up my mind. It was common back then for an IPO stock to be priced around $15, pop $5 to $7 on its first day, then maybe go up a bit the second day. For $15,000 invested, I would get $20,000-$22,000 back in two to three days tops. It was a nice perq while it lasted.

In late June 1999, Piper called and asked if I wanted 1,000 shares of Internet.com at $14.00 per share. I asked, “How does Internet.com actually make money?” The reply, “Who the fuck cares? With a name like that it’s going to pop at least 50 percent tomorrow. Are you in or out?” I decided to pass — and close my account at Piper. I didn’t know how long it would take, but the IPO party was coming to an end. If no one was actually even looking at the financials and expected a 50 percent return in one day, a crash couldn’t be far off.

I called the person that managed my money at Smith Barney and told them to sell all common and preferred stocks and either stay in cash or tax-free municipal bonds. She told me I was over-reacting and the market was fine, but still processed my order. The market crashed in March 2001 and wiped out a ton of wealth for people holding stocks in their investment account. My account barely budged.